---
layout: page
title: "Tutorial: Using the DB18B20 Temperature Sensor"
---

This tutorial will introduce you to the basics of reading values from a DS18B20 Temperature Sensor.

{% include figure.html src="../images/dallas/image_0.jpg" caption="A DS18B20 Temperature Sensor" class="medium right" %}

## You will need

* Particle Microcontroller 

* [Breadboard]({{site.baseurl}}/1-a-simple-internet-appliance/breadboards)

* [Jumper Wires]({{site.baseurl}}/1-a-simple-internet-appliance/jumpers)

* A capacitor (see below)

* A DS18B20 Temperature Sensor.


## Step 1: Identifying the DS18B20


The temperature sensor looks like this. You can tell it is the DS18B20 as the flat face will have "DALLAS" etched in tiny letters on the top and directly below the number ‘18B20’. (You might need to catch the right angle to see this)

The DS18B20 is an easy to use one wire digital thermometer with up to 12-bit measurement resolution.

* Supply Voltage: 3.0V to 5.5V DC

* Current consumption: 4mA max

* Measuring temperature range: -55°C to +125°C

* Accuracy: ±0.5°C (from -10°C to +85°C)

* Package: TO-92


{% include note.html type="warning" title="Spot the Difference" text="The DS18B20 looks virtually identical to the NPN Transistor provided in the kits. Be sure not to confuse them - to make sure you have the right one, check the top right corner of the flat face." %}


## About the DS18B20

This sensor is known as a 1-Wire digital temperature sensor. The [1-wire](http://playground.arduino.cc/Learning/OneWire) refers to the way in which you talk to the sensor and get information from it. This ‘family’ of sensors uses a specific protocol for how you get information from it. 

This means we need some special libraries to add to the ways our Particle device can interact with sensors. 

* [The OneWire Library. ](https://github.com/Hotaman/OneWireSpark)

* [The Dallas Temperature Control Library](https://github.com/tomdeboer/SparkCoreDallasTemperature)

You’ll need to download both from GitHub and copy the .cpp and .h files from the firmware folder to your project folder.

The sensor itself is pretty easy to wire up. You’ll notice is has three pins - one for power, one for ground and one for data (we read from this).  We wire the digital signal pin to a digital pin on the Particle board.

{% include figure.html src="../images/dallas/image_1.jpg" caption="Wiring a DS18B20" class="medium right" %}

Look at the diagram below. Keeping the flat face towards you wire the left pin to ground, the middle pin to your Digital pins, and the right leg to power (3v3). 

If you’re using the sealed temperature sensor in the kit the wiring is pretty similar. Red wire to power; black wire to ground; yellow wire to digital!

Finally, when you’re wiring the **DS18B20 you need to add a pull-up resistor**. Ideally use a 4.7 Ohm resistor (yellow, purple, red) but a 10K (Brown, Black, Orange) will do if that’s all you have. This is wired between the digital signal and power pin. 

{% include note.html type="tip" title="Pull-up resistor" text="A pull-up resistor weakly 'pulls' the voltage of the wire it is connected to towards its voltage source level when the other components on the line are inactive. It helps to give more reliable readings from inputs by avoiding ‘floating’ among other things. Read more at: [https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/pull-up-resistors](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/pull-up-resistors)" %}


## Step 1: Create your Circuit


{% include note.html type="error" title="A cautionary note" text="The temperature sensor must be correctly wired or you will permanently damage the chip. <br/><br/>To wire it correctly, hold it with the flat face towards you.  The left terminal (leg) should be wired to power (3V3). The right leg should be wired to ground (GND). <br/><br/>Do not mix them up. If you do, the chip will become extremely hot, it will become damaged and either give you no readings or incorrect values. " %}


The circuit, wiring and components are as follows:


{% include figure.html src="../images/dallas/image_2.png" caption="Circuit Diagram" class="" %}

Ideally, the sensor should be placed away from the Particle board so that the heat dissipated by the board does not affect the temperature readings.

## Step 4: Setting up the Sketch 

Let’s get the basics of our sketch underway.  We are going to combine all of the guides to do the following:

1. read from a sensor,

2. convert the sensor value into degrees Celsius and Farneheit

3. Put the converted sensor readings (temperatures) on the Particle Cloud

If you’d like to get the code for this directly, go to [http://github.com/daraghbyrne/DesigningIoT](http://github.com/daraghbyrne/DesigningIoT)


{% include note.html type="error" title="A note on supporting libraries" text="You'll need to download and include two libraries for this code to work 1) the OneWire library and 2) the Spark Dallas Temperature Library. Download them and include both in the same directory as your project. You may need to edit the library to make this work. If you get an error do the following. In the <code>spark-dallas-temperature.h</code> file, change line 27 from <code>#include \"../OneWire/OneWire.h\"</code> to <code>\"#include OneWire.h\"</code>. These are both already added to the code linked above." %}

**Let’s take a look at the code and explain it.**

````
// This #include statement was automatically added by the Spark IDE.
#include "OneWire.h"

// This #include statement was automatically added by the Spark IDE.
#include "spark-dallas-temperature.h"

// -----------------
// Read temperature
// -----------------

// Data wire is plugged into port 0 on the Arduino
// Setup a oneWire instance to communicate with any OneWire devices (not just Maxim/Dallas temperature ICs)
OneWire oneWire(D0 );

// Pass our oneWire reference to Dallas Temperature.
DallasTemperature dallas(&oneWire);

// Create a variable that will store the temperature value
double temperature = 0.0;
double temperatureF = 0.0;

void setup()
{
  // Register a Particle variable here
  Particle.variable("temperature", &temperature, DOUBLE);
  Particle.variable("temperatureF", &temperatureF, DOUBLE);

  // setup the library
  dallas.begin();
}

void loop()
{
  // Request temperature conversion

  dallas.requestTemperatures();

  // get the temperature in Celcius
  float tempC = dallas.getTempCByIndex(0);
  // convert to double
  temperature = (double)tempC;

  // convert to Fahrenheit
  float tempF = DallasTemperature::toFahrenheit( tempC );
  // convert to double
  temperatureF = (double)tempF;

  delay(5000);

}

/*
The API request will look something like this:
GET /v1/devices/{DEVICE_ID}/temperature

# EXAMPLE REQUEST IN TERMINAL
# Device ID is 0123456789abcdef
# Your access token is 123412341234
curl -G https://api.particle.io/v1/devices/0123456789abcdef/temperature \
  -d access_token=123412341234
*/
````


The sketch starts by including the two needed libraries - OneWire and DallasTemperature.

Then, it declaring that the temperature sensor will use OneWire to read sensor values on pin <code>D0</code>  and sets the DallasTemperature library to use this configuration of OneWire. Finally, it says we will use two double (decimal type) variables to store the celcius and farenheit temperature readings.

The <code>setup()</code> links these two variables to a Particle Cloud variable and indicates that they are of type <code> DOUBLE</code>  too.  Finally, it initializes the Dallas Temperature sensor

Now to the meat of our program…

Each time the <code>loop</code> function is called it first reads the value from our sensor and stores it in a double variable. We store the celsius range in the variable named <code>temperature</code>, quickly convert to fahrenheit, and we’re done!



## Step 5: Compiling and sending to your Particle board.

Make sure the Status Bar has a device connected and the device’s indicator is breathing blue. If not make sure your device is connected by USB and is getting a WiFi signal.

Press the Lightning bolt on the top left of the window. 

You’ll see a message ‘Compiling in the Cloud’ and a few sections later your device should start flashing magenta.

Wait a few moments, it should return to breathing blue, and the LED should be off.

## Step 6: Seeing your Variable

There’s two ways to control your light. The easy way is through Particle Dev, and then you can make a RESTful API call. We’ll do both.

#### Using Particle Dev.

Select the Particle menubar item, and choose the ‘Show Cloud Variable’ option (2nd from the bottom) and the following screen will appear and display and variables you registered. 

Click the Watch button to have it refresh every few seconds.

{% include figure.html src="../images/tmp36_2.jpg" caption="Particle Dev Cloud Variables" class="" %}


#### Using the REST API

* Open up [http://particle.io/build](http://particle.io/build)

* Select the Target Icon to view your devices. Select the device which is currently connected and the device ID information will appear.

* Copy down the device ID - you’ll need that in a second.

* You also need an Access Token. To get that click on the ‘Settings’ icon. You’ll see an access token string. Copy this down too.

* Modify the below and paste it into a Terminal Window


````
curl https://api.particle.io/v1/devices/[deviceID]/temperature?access_token=[token]
````


You will get a response like

````
"cmd": "VarReturn",
  "name": "temperature",
  "result": 125,
  "coreInfo": {
    "last_app": "",
    "last_heard": "2015-01-21T02:25:55.359Z",
    "connected": true,
    "deviceID": "53ff70066667574826292067"
  }
````


#### Using the Provided WebPage

Open up the webpage and enter your Device ID and Access Token for Particle cloud. It uses JQuery to make calls directly to the cloud API and your variable available in the browser.

#### Using the CLI

If you have the command line interface installed on your desktop you can access Particle variables as follows

Simple call the following (and replace the square brackets with your actual device ID!): 

`````

particle variable get [device_id] temperature

`````


## Additional Exercises

{% include note.html type="tip" title="Exercise 1" text="Add a photocell to the circuit and post both temperature and light readings to the Particle cloud" %}



## Find out more 


* [https://docs.particle.io/assets/datasheets/makerkit/DS18B20.pdf](https://docs.particle.io/assets/datasheets/makerkit/DS18B20.pdf) 

* [https://community.particle.io/t/ds18b20-working-example/8068/17](https://community.particle.io/t/ds18b20-working-example/8068/17) 

* [https://community.particle.io/t/ds18b20-with-photon-solved/14273/9](https://community.particle.io/t/ds18b20-with-photon-solved/14273/9) 

* [https://github.com/tomdeboer/SparkCoreDallasTemperature](https://github.com/tomdeboer/SparkCoreDallasTemperature) 

* [http://milesburton.com/Main_Page?title=Dallas_Temperature_Control_Library](http://milesburton.com/Main_Page?title=Dallas_Temperature_Control_Library) 

* [http://playground.arduino.cc/Learning/OneWire](http://playground.arduino.cc/Learning/OneWire) 


